Breech Delivery
protocolid=54
==========================
Management for All Levels - Medical Control Only
1. Place mother in delivery position, elevate pelvis with
pillows (modified Trendelenburg). Figure 1
2. If possible, allow the infant to deliver until the buttock
appears.
3. When providing traction, grasp the baby so that your
thumbs are over the baby’s hips (iliac crests). Do not
pull on the legs or apply pressure to the soft lower
back
4. Rotate the torso so the baby is face down in the birth
canal. 

Figure 2

Management for All Levels - Medical Control Only

Figure 2

5. If possible, extract a 4 - 6 inch loop of umbilical cord for
slack.
6. Apply gentle downward traction until the hairline is
visible.
7. Place one hand under the trunk, so that the infant’s
body rests on the palm, and the index and middle
finger of that same hand support the mouth and chin.
8. Place the other hand on the infant’s back and
shoulders, with the middle and index finger of that
hand resting on the infant’s shoulders, supporting the
posterior neck.
9. A towel can be wrapped around the lower body to
provide a more stable grip, as needed.
10. Have your assistant apply suprapubic pressure to keep
the fetal head flexed, expedite delivery, and reduce
risk of spinal injury. 

Figure 3
Figure 3

11. Continue light downward traction until shoulder blades
or armpits appear.
12. If resistance is felt, arms may need to be freed prior to
continuing. Exert gentle outward traction on the baby
while rotating the baby clockwise and then
counterclockwise a few degrees to free the arms.

Management for All Levels - Medical Control Only
13. If the arms are trapped in the birth canal, you may
need to reach up along the side of the baby and sweep
them one at a time, across the chest and out of the
vagina.
14. After the shoulders have delivered, rotate the infant so
that the back is anterior. 

Figure 4

15. Apply gentle downward traction until the hairline is
visible.
16. Place one hand under the trunk, so that the infant’s
body rests on the palm, and the index and middle
finger of that same hand support the mouth and chin.
17. Place the other hand on the infant’s back and
shoulders, with the middle and index finger of that
hand resting on the infant’s shoulders, supporting the
posterior neck.
18. Slowly bring the body upward, while a second person
applies suprapubic pressure to facilitate the delivery of
the head.
19. Slowly allow the chin, face, and then brow to be
delivered. Try not to let the head “pop” out of the birth
canal. A slower, controlled delivery is less traumatic.
20. Perform post birth procedures and / or neonatal
resuscitation per normal patient care protocol.
21. If unable to deliver head, place gloved index and
middle finger in the vagina with the palm towards the
baby’s face to maintain airway and pushing the infant
up to relieve pressure on the cord.
22. Transport immediately.

Figure 4

